Articles
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00796-2
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 2Department of Energy Resources Engineering, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA. 3Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 4Stanford Woods Institute for the 
Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. ✉e-mail: criddle@stanford.edu
H
umanity must address the challenge of meeting growing 
food demand in the face of global climate change. Current 
food systems directly emit greenhouse gases but also con-
tribute indirectly to climate change (for example, through land 
use change1). One important global source of protein and micro-
nutrients is seafood, the production of which increased from 40 to 
180 million metric tons per year between 1960 and 20152. Farming 
aquatic animals now accounts for almost half of all animal-source 
seafood3, with 90% of the world’s marine fisheries fully fished or 
overfished4. While practices vary greatly worldwide, fed aquacul-
ture relies on fishmeal for protein, consuming 70% of global fish-
meal production and increasing pressures on marine resources5,6. 
Overfishing marine environments leads to long-term loss in biodi-
versity and irreversible damage to marine ecosystems7. Many plant 
proteins are a promising substitute for fishmeal but require addi-
tional inputs of land, freshwater and fertilizer8.
Methane has at least 25 times the global warming potential of 
CO2 over a 100-year period9. The total annual methane emissions 
in the United States for 2014–2018 exceeded 630 million metric tons 
of CO2 equivalents per year. In 2018, oil and gas systems accounted 
for nearly 30% of total emissions, with landfills and wastewater treat-
ment accounting for another 17% and 2%, respectively10. Unlike other 
major methane emitters, these sources also flare methane, releasing 
large amounts of CO2 to the atmosphere. Taken together, methane 
emissions and flaring in the United States release nearly 14 billion 
m3 per year. Because these sources are geographically dispersed and 
small scale, increasing unit capital and labour costs, methane is emit-
ted or flared rather than captured, cleaned and used11.
Methanotrophic bacteria transform methane into protein-rich 
biomass, which can be used as an animal feed and has a simi-
lar amino acid profile to fishmeal. Methanotrophic feed, referred 
to as single cell protein (SCP), is approved for salmon feed in the 
European Union at rates of up to 33%12. Because methanotrophs 
do not require light, dense cultures are grown in bioreactors with 
low spatial footprints not feasible with terrestrial agriculture13. 
Companies in the United States and the European Union (such 
as Calysta14 and Unibio15) are commercializing the production of 
methanotrophic SCP from natural gas.
Industrial production of methanotrophic SCP is depicted in Fig. 
1. Methanotrophic growth requires methane, oxygen, nitrogen, 
phosphorus and trace metal micronutrients. Compressors sepa-
rately deliver pressurized methane and oxygen to the bioreactor 
and provide mixing. Methanotrophs grow in pressurized, top-fed 
airlift bioreactors equipped with cooling jackets and coils to remove 
metabolic heat produced during growth, maintaining biologically 
viable temperatures16. Biomass is then dewatered and dried for stor-
age and shipping.
Using methane currently emitted or flared to produce metha-
notrophic SCP can incentivize the capture of stranded resources 
with the dual benefit of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and 
generating a sustainable protein substitute for fishmeal. Stranded 
methane has also been proposed as a feedstock for future bioman-
ufacturing, potentially enabling a paradigm shift from large-scale 
mega-facilities to smaller-scale, widespread, mobile production11. 
Recent studies have evaluated potential environmental benefits of 
methanotrophic SCP and indicate promising economics17–19. This 
analysis evaluates the market potential of methanotrophic SCP 
across existing sources of stranded methane. While we focus on the 
United States, the same approach can be applied elsewhere.
Here we investigate the capacity to convert stranded methane 
into methanotrophic SCP at a cost competitive with fishmeal. We 
evaluate the market potential and cost sensitivities by modelling the 
production process outlined in Fig. 1. Our analysis assumes mature 
methanotrophic SCP production facilities using current technology. 
We consider different scenarios for production, in which meth-
ane is derived from different sources of stranded methane in the 
United States: wastewater treatment plants, landfills, and oil and gas 
facilities. We compare a fourth scenario in which natural gas is pur-
chased from the grid. We conclude with an analysis of the stranded 
methane market potential and the cost of scaling SCP production.
Displacing fishmeal with protein derived from 
stranded methane
Sahar H. El Abbadi   1, Evan D. Sherwin   2, Adam R. Brandt   2, Stephen P. Luby   3,4 and 
Craig S. Criddle   1,4 ✉
Methane emitted and flared from industrial sources across the United States is a major contributor to global climate change. 
Methanotrophic bacteria can transform this methane into useful protein-rich biomass, already approved for inclusion into 
animal feed. In the rapidly growing aquaculture industry, methanotrophic additives have a favourable amino acid profile and 
can offset ocean-caught fishmeal, reducing demands on over-harvested fisheries. Here we analyse the economic potential of 
producing methanotrophic microbial protein from stranded methane produced at wastewater treatment plants, landfills, and 
oil and gas facilities. Our results show that current technology can enable production, in the United States alone, equivalent 
to 14% of the global fishmeal market at prices at or below the current cost of fishmeal (roughly US$1,600 per metric ton). A 
sensitivity analysis highlights technically and economically feasible cost reductions (such as reduced cooling or labour require-
ments), which could allow stranded methane from the United States alone to satisfy global fishmeal demand.
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
47
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
Results
Our analysis indicates that the production of methanotrophic pro-
tein from stranded methane in the United States is economically 
competitive with fishmeal, when considering both potential cost 
and volume of production.
Stranded methane in the United States. Stranded methane 
produced from industrial sources is either directly emitted to 
the atmosphere as methane or combusted in flares and emitted 
as CO2. In this study, we analyse methane emitted and flared 
from landfills20 and from oil and gas facilities21,22. We also con-
sider methane from wastewater treatment plants with opera-
tional anaerobic digesters that lack biogas utilization technology 
on-site23–25, indicating that the methane is probably flared26. The 
geographic distribution of the included methane sources and their 
respective sizes are depicted in Fig. 2a for the contiguous United 
States. The methane sources are distributed across the country, 
with landfills and wastewater treatment plants concentrated near 
population centres.
We compare methane emitted and flared from the sources in 
question in Fig. 2b–d (see Supplementary Table 1 for the summary 
statistics). Mean methane production is the lowest for wastewater 
treatment plants (less than 1 ton CH4 per day) and the highest for 
landfill flaring (31 tons CH4 per day) and oil and gas flaring (10 
tons CH4 per day). The maximum reported values range from 148 
tons CH4 per day for wastewater treatment plants to 420 tons CH4 
per day directly emitted from oil and gas facilities. The low mean 
and median values compared with the maximum reported source 
sizes as well as the heavy tail distributions are indicative of the high 
number of smaller methane sources and the small number of high 
emission point sources, evident in Fig. 2b–d.
Fully utilizing stranded methane resources and reducing their 
climate change impact will require harnessing sources that corre-
spond to smaller-than-conventional bioreactors (depicted by the 
vertical line in Fig. 2b–d). We also compare methanotrophic SCP 
production potential with the current global fishmeal market. 
High-quality fishmeal is 60–72% crude protein27, and methanotro-
phic biomass is 67–81% crude protein12. This analysis thus defines 
the SCP product as the organic biomass of the dried cell (commonly 
referred to as volatile suspended solids), which we compare directly 
with fishmeal. Should smaller methane sources become economi-
cally competitive and technologically viable for methanotrophic 
SCP production, the resulting biomass could readily exceed the 
current size of the global fishmeal market using US-based stranded 
methane alone.
Protein production economics. We establish four baseline scenar-
ios, in which methane is sourced from wastewater treatment plants, 
landfills, oil and gas facilities, and natural gas purchased from the 
grid (Table 1). The wastewater treatment plants, landfills, and oil 
and gas facilities are sized on the basis of the largest methane sources 
in our dataset, when considering both emissions and flaring. These 
large methane sources are likely to be the most cost-effective loca-
tions for methanotrophic SCP production due to their potential to 
benefit from economies of scale. The grid scenario is sized to match 
the landfill scenario, where physically proximate population centres 
make labour and electricity more readily available and therefore 
more representative of early production locations.
Methane
source
Methanotroph
reactor
Dewatering
centrifuge
Biomass
dryer
Methane
cleanup
CH4 compressor
Air compressor
Air (1 bar)
SCP
animal feed
Removed
contaminants
(H2S, siloxanes)
CH4 (1 bar)
Electricity
Gas compression
Methanotrophic growth
Final processing
e–
e–
e–
Biomass
(35% H2O)
Biomass
Air
(8 bar)
CH4
(8 bar)
Biomass
(10% H2O)
Cooling
Cooling
Water
1,500 kWh
5,090 kWh
1,700 kWh
4.2 tons O2
1.4 tons CH4
(1 ton C)
3 tons H2O
2 tons CO2
(0.5 tons C)
Macronutrients
0.15 tons NH3
0.02 tons P
Heat
55 MJ
1 ton SCP
(0.5 tons C)
Fig. 1 | Process model for methanotrophic biomass production. Methane is cleaned to remove contaminants, then compressed and delivered to the growth 
bioreactor along with compressed air, which is the source of oxygen. Methanotrophic growth occurs in pressurized bioreactors equipped with cooling jackets 
and coils to remove the metabolic heat produced. Exhaust CO2 is released from the growth bioreactors, and biomass is processed in dewatering centrifuges 
and dryers, after which it can serve as SCP feed for agriculture or aquaculture. The labels on the figure in italics represent the mass or energy flow associated 
with the production of one ton of methanotrophic SCP.
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
48
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
We find that production costs for methanotrophic SCP are lower 
than the market price for fishmeal in the landfill and oil and gas 
scenarios when using the ten-year average market price of fishmeal 
(US$1,600 per ton) as a benchmark for comparison (Fig. 3). For 
the wastewater treatment scenario, the production cost is slightly 
higher (US$1,645 per ton), largely due to increased labour cost. The 
grid scenario is the most expensive (US$1,783 per ton), attribut-
able to the cost of purchasing natural gas. All scenarios except for 
wastewater treatment are individually capable of producing over 
159 tons SCP per day, which represents 1% of the global fishmeal 
market (15,900 tons SCP per day)2 and a meaningful market share 
for emerging technologies.
Electricity costs make up over 45% of the total levelized cost in all 
scenarios. Over 60% of the power needed is required for removing 
metabolic heat from the bioreactor (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 
2), an amount in line with previous studies of methanotrophs16. We 
thus depict cooling costs separately from electricity costs associ-
ated with powering other equipment in Fig. 3. Considering elec-
tricity alone, cooling requires US$509 per ton SCP, dewatering and 
drying combined require US$177 per ton SCP, and air compres-
sion requires US$136 per ton SCP (Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). 
Capital costs make up less than 15% of the total levelized cost in 
all scenarios but remain one of the leading costs in the breakdown. 
Methane cleanup (where required), nutrient media (N, P, H2O), and 
operations and maintenance each make up 5–10% of total levelized 
cost across all scenarios. In the grid scenario, the cost of purchasing 
natural gas is 18% of the total cost.
Despite having an SCP production rate over 50% lower than the 
other baseline scenarios, the wastewater treatment plant scenario 
is only 6% more costly than the landfill and oil and gas scenarios. 
This is because our model implements a conservative approach to 
capital cost scaling whereby large bioreactors do not benefit from 
economies of scale. Specifically, we assume that industrial biore-
actors will not exceed 500 m3 in volume28, so for methane sources 
requiring total reactor volumes exceeding this cut-off, we maintain 
a constant unit capital cost. This is representative of multiple reac-
tors operating in parallel, as opposed to an increasingly large single 
bioreactor (see Methods for more details). As all four scenarios 
Source type
Landfill currently emitted
Landfill currently flared
Oil and gas currently emitted
Oil and gas currently flared
Wastewater treatment
Tons of methane per day
1
100
200
300
400
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Wastewater treatment
Source size (tons CH4 per day)
Total CH4 capture potential
(tons CH4 per day)
Global fishmeal market
(15,900 tons per day)
500 m3 bioreactor
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Landfills
Source size (tons CH4 per day)
Flaring
Emissions
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
Source size (tons CH4 per day)
Total methanotroph production
potential (tons SCP per day)
Flaring
Emissions
Oil and natural gas facilities
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
a
b
c
d
Fig. 2 | Methane sources and capture potential. a, Unused methane generation in the contiguous United States. Point sources indicate methane currently 
emitted and flared from landfills20,21 and from oil and gas facilities21,22 and methane production from wastewater treatment plants currently not utilized23–25. 
b–d, Cumulative methane capture potential for different source types (wastewater treatment (b), landfills (c) and oil and natural gas facilities (d) is 
depicted on the left y axis (tons CH4 per day). The right y axis depicts the corresponding total methanotrophic production potential in tons of SCP per day, 
calculated assuming a yield of 0.7 tons SCP per ton CH4 (refs. 13,64). The horizontal line indicates production equivalent to the total global fishmeal market 
(15,900 tons per day). The vertical line at a source size of 86 tons CH4 per day corresponds to a 500 m3 bioreactor, a typical size for an industrial-scale 
reactor28. Bioreactor size is calculated assuming a yield of 0.7 tons SCP per ton CH4 (ref. 13), a cell growth rate of 4 per day13 and a cell density of 
30 g SCP l−1 (ref. 16).
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
49
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
have a total bioreactor volume greater than 500 m3, they do not gain 
additional benefit from economies of scale, and all have the same 
capital cost contribution to total levelized cost. However, labour 
costs also increase with decreasing production rate, resulting in the 
increased cost at wastewater treatment plants. For the grid scenario, 
the additional cost of natural gas (US$326 per ton SCP) increases 
the total levelized cost, which is only somewhat offset by removing 
the requirement for methane cleanup (US$89 per ton SCP).
Figure 4 depicts a supply curve for the production of metha-
notrophic SCP from the stranded methane sources in Fig. 2. The 
cost of production is calculated using the baseline assumptions and 
scaling relationship described in the Methods. Keeping prices at or 
below the benchmark price of fishmeal (US$1,600 per ton), these 
sources are able to produce nearly 2,200 tons SCP per day, or 14% of 
the global fishmeal market. Including sources that produce methane 
at costs of up to US$2,050 would enable production at a level greater 
than the current global fishmeal market of 15,900 tons SCP per day.
We identify key cost sensitivities in Fig. 5, which depicts a sen-
sitivity analysis that begins with the cost of producing methano-
trophic protein in the landfill scenario. Here the levelized cost of 
methanotrophic SCP production under baseline assumptions is 
US$1,546 per ton. We use the landfill scenario for the sensitivity 
analysis because these facilities are typically located close to popula-
tion centres, meaning that labour and electricity are probably read-
ily available (see Supplementary Fig. 1 for sensitivity analyses of the 
wastewater treatment, oil and gas, and grid scenarios). The input 
variables included in Fig. 5 are those that result in a change of 5% or 
greater in the calculated levelized cost. The high cost of cooling is 
reflected in the sensitivity to the coefficient of performance (COP) 
for the assumed refrigeration system16; doubling the COP reduces 
the levelized cost by over 15%, whereas decreasing the COP from 3 
to 2 increases the cost by over 15%. The high sensitivity to electricity 
also aligns with the large contributions of cooling, gas compression 
and biomass drying to the total cost. Decreasing the cost of electric-
ity to US$0.06 kWh−1, in line with industrial rates in the lowest-cost 
parts of the United States (Mississippi and Texas29), reduces the lev-
elized cost by 22% to US$1,214 per ton SCP, whereas increasing the 
price to that available to residential consumers, US$0.14 kWh−1 (as 
in Pennsylvania and Illinois29), increases the levelized cost by 22% 
to US$1,881 per ton.
The model is also sensitive to labour, unit capital cost and micro-
bial yield. We increase labour by 350% to 4.5 worker-hours per ton 
SCP, reflecting a 90% smaller facility at a size that our model sug-
gests would be necessary to fully offset the fishmeal market using 
the current supply of stranded methane from the sources analysed. 
This increase in the labour requirement introduces a 28% increase 
in cost to nearly US$1,985 per ton. Increasing the unit capital cost 
by 156% to the high value reported in the literature (US$1.3M per 
ton per day17) increases the total levelized cost by 21%. Increasing 
the microbial yield by 29% to the high value reported in the litera-
ture decreases the price by 1.8% to US$1,520, indicating the poten-
tial of selecting for higher-yield organisms to introduce additional 
marginal cost savings.
The input parameters that introduce changes in levelized cost 
less than 5% are summarized in Supplementary Table 4. The costs 
of non-methane substrates (ammonia and phosphorus) have 
Wastewater treatment
148 tons CH4 per day
Landfills
345 tons CH4 per day
Oil and gas
420 tons CH4 per day
Grid
345 tons CH4 per day
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
Production cost of methanotrophic SCP (US$ per ton)
Capital costs
O&M
Nutrient media
(N, P, water)
US$1,546 per ton
US$1,531 per ton
US$1,600 per ton
(price of fishmeal)
US$1,645 per ton
Methane cleanup
US$1,783 per ton
Non-cooling electricity
Cooling electricity
Natural gas
Labour
Fig. 3 | Levelized cost of methanotrophic microbial protein across baseline scenarios in which methane comes from wastewater treatment, landfills, 
oil and gas facilities, and the natural gas grid. The baseline scenarios represent the largest feasible sources of stranded methane by source type. The 
grid baseline is sized to match the landfill baseline. In all cases, the largest cost is electricity. The power needed for heat removal is separated from other 
electricity costs to illustrate its impact. The grid scenario sees an increase in cost due to the purchase of natural gas, which is slightly offset by the removal 
of the methane cleanup requirement. The baseline scenarios for landfill and oil and gas are lower than the average ten-year market price of fishmeal 
(US$1,600 per ton). Further opportunities for cost reduction are present at wastewater treatment plants, through locally sourced nutrients and cooling 
water. O&M, operations and maintenance.
Table 1 | Characterizing four methane source scenarios
Scenario
Source size 
(tons CH4 
per day)
Total reactor 
volume (m3)
Methanotroph 
production (tons 
SCP per day)
Wastewater treatment
148
860
83
Landfills
345
2,010
193
Oil and gas
420
2,450
235
Grid
345
2,010
193
Methane source sizes represent the largest point sources from emissions or flaring in each location 
type. The total reactor volume and methanotroph SCP production rate are calculated on the basis 
of a methane utilization rate of 0.14 tons CH4 per m3 per day and a microbial yield of 0.7 tons 
volatile suspended solids (SCP) per ton CH4. Methanotroph production potential assumes the same 
microbial yield and applies a utilization factor of 80% to allow for the time needed for maintenance 
and repairs.
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
50
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
minimal impacts (less than 3%) on the levelized cost within the 
price ranges observed for these compounds over the past ten years. 
Infrastructure lifetime, weighted average cost of capital, scaling fac-
tor and utilization factor also introduce changes of less than 5%.
Discussion
We find that methanotrophic biomass is cost competitive with fish-
meal when produced with current technology. Stranded methane 
in the United States can serve as a growth substrate capable of sup-
porting methanotrophic SCP production that can offset 14% of the 
global fishmeal market. Companies are already commercializing 
the production of methanotrophic SCP using natural gas, which 
we find to be nearly economically competitive with fishmeal. Our 
model indicates that replacing purchased grid natural gas with 
stranded methane is competitive at a large scale, lowering costs to 
below the ten-year average price of fishmeal. The largest sources of 
stranded methane can serve as a starting point for industrial SCP 
production, enabling technological advances and cost reductions 
that can further expand production to include smaller sources of 
methane at more remote locations. Using smaller methane sources 
will enable protein production to exceed the current global fishmeal 
market. Reaching such production levels will require meaning-
ful cost reductions for smaller-scale facilities, potentially through 
increased electrical efficiency and reduced labour requirements.
We identify a number of priority areas for cost reduction to 
enable the commercialization and expansion of methanotroph 
SCP production. Across all scenarios considered, cooling costs are 
dominant. Reactors may be designed to facilitate surface area for 
heat transfer30, while culturing thermophilic methanotrophs can 
enable higher-temperature operation, thus reducing heat removal 
requirements16. Electricity costs may be further reduced by switch-
ing electric-powered applications to gas, which can also reduce reli-
ance on grid electricity for remote locations. Future analysis should 
evaluate the trade-off associated with using stranded methane for 
methanotrophic feedstock versus meeting the energy demand for 
production, as well as opportunities for on-site renewable energy 
generation.
As methanotrophic production scales to capture smaller sources 
of methane, the labour cost per ton of protein increases31. Research 
and development priorities would thus benefit from focusing on 
automating processes to reduce labour requirements at small-scale 
facilities. Automation will also enable utilizing stranded methane 
from remote oil and gas facilities not readily accessible by popula-
tion centres, where labour is at a premium. As technology advances, 
smaller methane point sources are also likely to benefit from econ-
omies of unit number, whereby the production of many smaller 
units enables greater capital cost savings than the production of 
larger-scale facilities11.
This analysis makes the generous assumption that currently 
vented methane emissions can be captured and concentrated at 
minimal additional capital cost. While this is the case for methane 
flares, vented sources of methane may be diffuse and require capital 
investment for capture. For landfills, a number of existing capping 
techniques can be used to reduce and collect diffuse emissions32, 
many of which are currently used in the United States for capturing 
landfill gas20. This analysis also considers methane emissions and 
flaring as separate sources. However, for landfills and oil and gas 
facilities, both types of point source may occur in close proximity or 
1,000 1,100 1,200 1,300 1,400 1,500 1,600 1,700 1,800 1,900 2,000 2,100 2,200 2,300 2,400 2,500
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
20,000
22,000
24,000
26,000
28,000
30,000
Methanotroph annualized cost (US$ per ton SCP)
Cumulative SCP production (tons per day)
Price of fishmeal
(US$1,600 per ton)
Global fishmeal market
(15,900 tons per day)
14% of global fishmeal market
(2,200 tons per day)
Fig. 4 | Supply curve for methanotrophic production using stranded methane. Each point represents a point source of methane, and the x axis indicates 
the corresponding levelized cost of protein that can be produced from that facility. The y axis indicates the cumulative amount of protein that can be 
produced with each additional facility. When the cost of methanotrophic protein is kept below that of fishmeal, methanotrophic production potential is 
equivalent to 14% of the global fishmeal market. Allowing costs to reach US$2,050 could enable fully offsetting the global fishmeal market. We include 
only methane that is not currently being used elsewhere—the full market potential for SCP production from methane is even higher if we consider 
displacing other applications.
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
51
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
even at the same facility. Further opportunities for large-scale pro-
duction may thus be available by collecting methane from physically 
proximate sources and using pooled gas to feed a larger bioreactor 
than would be feasible from the individual sources on their own. 
Furthermore, in this analysis, we only consider methane that is not 
currently being used elsewhere. Considering the displacement of 
other applications will increase the full market potential for meth-
anotrophic SCP. Our analysis is focused on the United States due 
to the availability of high-quality data; however, stranded methane 
around the world could be used with similar systems. This analysis 
also does not consider policies (such as carbon credits or tax) that 
may increase the economic favourability of methanotrophic SCP.
The methane production rate and economic prospects of current 
stranded methane sources are expected to change with the trans-
forming energy landscape. Fossil methane is currently the largest 
source of stranded methane in the United States, the production 
of which will decrease with the transition to renewable energy. 
As conventional natural gas is phased out, approaches such as the 
bio-electrolytic production of methane from carbon dioxide and 
hydrogen may be used as future renewable substrates for growth33.
While we find methane from wastewater treatment plants to be 
currently not competitive with the price of fishmeal, these facili-
ties present a number of opportunities for cost reduction. Labour 
and electricity will be readily accessible for facilities such as waste-
water treatment plants and landfills, typically located near popu-
lation centres, whereas meeting these requirements will be more 
costly at remote oil and gas facilities. Nitrogen and phosphorous 
may be locally sourced from effluent, potentially through the use 
of precipitated struvite34, although future analysis must determine 
the economic impacts of additional treatment processes needed. 
Wastewater effluent could replace refrigerant for cooling should 
thermophilic production be adopted16. Future research should 
further investigate the cost-saving opportunities presented by 
co-located wastewater treatment plants through different cooling 
and nutrient recovery technology configurations.
Methanotrophic SCP may also economically benefit from 
increasing cost and environmental limitations on fishmeal produc-
tion. Fishmeal prices have nearly tripled in real terms since 2000 
(Supplementary Fig. 2)35, while total production has decreased36. Yet 
fishmeal currently accounts for nearly 20% of capture fishery pro-
duction, despite decreasing inclusion rates of fishmeal in aquacul-
ture feed (discussed in Supplementary Note 1)2. Methanotrophs can 
also confer health benefits to fish and shrimp, which may further 
increase their value (discussed in Supplementary Note 2)13. In addi-
tion to serving as a component of aquaculture feed, methanotrophs 
are promising for use in agricultural animal and pet feeds12.
Any protein under consideration as a fishmeal replacement will 
require holistic economic, environmental and nutritional evalua-
tion37. While we do not include a life-cycle assessment, incentivizing 
the capture of methane provides a beneficial end-use for gas that is 
currently emitted or flared. Substantial reductions in climate change 
impact can be achieved through the use of renewable methane 
rather than the current industry approach of using grid-supplied 
natural gas38. This can be readily achieved for methane currently 
flared or emitted at point sources or diffuse sources that can be 
readily capped (discussed above).
Further environmental benefits may be derived by providing an 
alternative to wild-caught fishmeal, when not harvested sustain-
ably through improved management practices (see Supplementary 
Note 1 for further details)39,40. However, because fishmeal provides 
vitamins, minerals and lipids essential for fish growth, in addition 
to protein41, fully replacing fishmeal will require the development 
of feed blends that meet life-stage-specific and species-specific 
nutritional requirements, potentially through combining diverse 
species of methanotrophs with other feed ingredients. Additional 
uses for forage fish, such as fish oil, may also drive future demand. 
–100
0
100
200
300
400
1,100
1,200
1,300
1,400
1,500
1,600
1,700
1,800
1,900
2,000
Input percent change (%)
Cost of methanotrophic protein (US$ per ton SCP)
Cost of electricity
Labour requirement
COP
CH4
cleanup
Unit capital
cost
Microbial
yield
O&M
Fig. 5 | Sensitivity analysis for baseline methanotroph production at landfills, individually varying the parameters to low and high values. The x axis 
represents the resulting percent change of each parameter input, and the y axis represents the corresponding levelized cost of production US$ per ton 
SCP (note: to show differences more clearly, the y axis does not end at zero). We include all input parameters that result in a change of 5% or greater in 
calculated levelized cost of methanotrophic SCP (US$ per ton). Production is highly sensitive to cost of electricity, cooling COP, and labour. Levelized cost 
is also sensitive to unit capital cost and microbial yield. Changes in slope for microbial yield and COP are reflective of nonlinearities in these inputs.
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
52
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
One potential replacement for fish oil is microalgae, which is not 
yet economically competitive with fish oil, largely due to the high 
costs of fermentation42 and the energy requirements for collection 
and drying5. However, technological advances accompanying the 
widespread production of methanotrophic SCP could improve 
the economic prospects for microalgae cultivation, potentially 
through innovative approaches that involve co-culturing metha-
notrophs with algae43,44. Additional environmental benefits could 
be achieved if methanotrophic SCP were to replace soybean in 
animal feeds, but this would require further cost reductions17 
(Supplementary Note 1).
Our analysis demonstrates the market potential for methanotro-
phic SCP grown on stranded methane to serve as a replacement for 
fishmeal in animal feed. At current market prices, we find that a 
20% decrease in methanotrophic SCP production costs could sup-
ply the total global demand for fishmeal. A reduction in demand 
for fishmeal would probably lower prices, potentially increas-
ing the demand for fishmeal in other sectors (namely, pet food or 
agricultural feeds)36. However, methanotrophs are also a promis-
ing replacement for fishmeal in other such sectors12 and may also 
see a corresponding price reduction as technologies mature. As 
some producers may prefer to pay a premium for fishmeal, market 
acceptability studies are a key area of future research. Furthermore, 
expanding methanotrophic production to secondary markets 
such as bioplastic production could serve to further incentivize 
methane capture. Overall, reducing methane emissions and the 
over-harvesting of marine resources are highly complex problems, 
but methanotrophic SCP is promising as one part of a suite of neces-
sary interventions for sustainable food production.
Methods
Here we describe the methods used for the two key components of our study: 
analysis of stranded methane in the United States and evaluation of protein 
production economics through techno-economic modelling. Additional details on 
methodology are included in the Supplementary Information.
Data. Wastewater treatment data. We used data from the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA)’s publicly available Clean Watersheds Needs Survey 
to identify wastewater treatment facilities with anaerobic digestion and their 
corresponding geographic location (latitude and longitude), average daily 
treatment rate and presence of biogas utilization unit processes. Using previously 
described methods45, we merged the 2004, 2008 and 2012 data to generate a dataset 
for all wastewater treatment facilities with anaerobic digestion that do not have 
on-site biogas utilization facilities, as well as their reported wastewater flow rates 
and geographic coordinates. Biogas production corresponding to a given flow rate 
was calculated by using the conversion 1.5 standard cubic feet of biogas produced 
per 100 gallons of wastewater processed46 and assuming 60% methane content 
in biogas, a conservative estimate for anaerobic digestors47. See Supplementary 
Methods for further details.
Landfill data. For the landfill direct emissions data, we used the EPA’s publicly 
available Facilities Level Information on GreenHouse Gases Tool21 for 2019 
methane emissions from the following sectors: municipal landfills, industrial 
landfills and solid waste combustion. For the flaring data, we used the EPA’s 
Landfill Methane Outreach Program from August 202020. See Supplementary 
Methods for further details.
Natural gas and petroleum data. For the natural gas and petroleum direct emissions 
data, we also used the EPA’s Facilities Level Information on GreenHouse Gases 
Tool21, downloading all 2019 methane emissions for the Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Systems sector, including all sub-headings. For the flaring data, we used 
Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite data from 201922 (discussed further in 
Supplementary Methods).
Techno-economic model. This analysis models a methanotroph production 
system consisting of the following cost components: annualized capital costs, 
annualized operations and maintenance, methanotroph nutrient requirements 
(ammonia and phosphorus), water, labour and electricity demand for all 
equipment and processes. We included the cost of methane cleanup (US$ per 
ton CH4) as well. While additional micronutrients are required for microbial 
growth (for example, trace metals), we consider these to be minor costs and did 
not include them in the scope of the current analysis (Supplementary Note 3). We 
established baseline values for each input to determine the levelized cost in four 
different scenarios for sourcing methane: co-location with wastewater treatment 
plants, landfills, natural gas facilities and a facility with a paid connection to the 
natural gas grid.
Methanotrophic properties. For the purposes of this analysis, we defined the 
final SCP product as the organic biomass of the dried cell (also referred to as 
volatile suspended solids). Microbial properties of yield (tons SCP produced per 
ton substrate consumed), cell density (grams SCP per litre) and specific growth 
rate (per day) determine how much biomass can be produced in a reactor in a 
given period of time (see Supplementary equations (1) and (2) in Supplementary 
Methods). We used these parameters to determine methanotroph production rate 
for our baseline levelized cost calculations. Using the stoichiometry in equation 
(1) to describe methanotrophic growth13, we calculated the baseline microbial 
yields for each compound required for growth: methane, oxygen and nitrogen (in 
units of N as ammonia). For phosphorus, we assumed 2% of biomass by weight 
(Supplementary Table 8)47:
CH4 + 1.5 O2 + 0.10 NH3 →0.10 C5H7O2N
+0.5 CO2 + 1.8 H2O + 643 kJ heat
(1)
For cell density in the bioreactor, microbial growth rate (per day) and heat 
production (kJ per g SCP), we surveyed the literature to identify representative 
values for industrial methanotrophic growth (Supplementary Tables 7 and 8). 
From these values, we calculated the methane utilization rate (0.14 tons CH4 
per m3 per day) and the size of the bioreactor needed for a given source size. See 
Supplementary Methods for further details.
Capital costs. We modelled a methanotroph production system with the following 
equipment: methane and air compressors, growth bioreactor, dewatering centrifuge 
and biomass dryer (Fig. 1). We first determined a literature baseline unit capital 
cost value on the basis of reported costs and capacity. For the bioreactor, this 
literature baseline value was then scaled to the size established for each methane 
source scenario described in Table 1. We assumed that all equipment costs except 
the bioreactor have a constant unit capital cost, to represent the increasing unit 
number of the equipment operating in parallel. We used 500 m3 as a benchmark 
for the largest bioreactor size feasible in our model. This is representative of the 
largest industrial aerated, stirred-tank bioreactors in operation28. For bioreactors 
smaller than 500 m3, we applied a scaling relationship based on the total bioreactor 
volume described in equation (2). For bioreactors 500 m3 or greater, we used the 
unit capital cost of a 500 m3 reactor as a model for multiple reactors operating 
in parallel. For the bioreactor scaling factor n, we used 0.7, a mid-value of the 
reported and calculated scaling factors in the literature28,48 (see Supplementary 
Methods for additional details):
Cost2 = Cost1
( Size2
Size1
)n
(2)
Gases are pressurized from 1 bar to 8 bar before delivery to the methanotrophic 
bioreactor16,49. For air and methane compression, we used the continuous 
centrifugal air compressor described in Levett et al.16. For air compression, we 
calculated the unit capital cost using the reported air flow rate, capital costs and 
electricity usage for a 52.8 MW compressor (Supplementary Table 3). To establish 
the literature baseline unit capital cost for methane compression, we used the same 
compressor specifications but scaled the capital cost for the reduced methane flow 
rate reported in Levett et al. using the size scaling exponent for air compression 
(n = 0.34)50. We assumed a power rating of 3.6 MW for the reported methane flow 
rate, on the basis of modelling in Aspen Plus V11 37.0.0.
Pressurized gases and media enter the continuous airlift methanotrophic 
bioreactor. Heat is removed via a cooling jacket and coils included in the  
bioreactor capital cost. Biomass from the bioreactor is dewatered in a biomass 
centrifuge, reducing the water content to 35% (ref. 16). Biomass is then dried  
in a continuous rotary drum dryer that further reduces the moisture content to 
10% (ref. 16).
All costs were adjusted to 2020 US dollars using the annual average 
Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers as reported by the US Bureau 
of Labor Statistics51. To calculate the levelized capital cost, we used a weighted 
average cost of capital of 10%, representative of a new technology52. We assumed 
an infrastructure lifetime of 20 years16 (the calculations are shown in the 
Supplementary Methods). The cost of operations and maintenance of equipment 
was set at 10% of the total capital cost per year16.
Electricity costs. To calculate electricity costs, we considered the power demand 
of individual equipment needed for each stage of methanotrophic biomass 
production: gas compression (methane and air), growth reactor, dewatering and 
drying. We used the reported power demand in Levett et al.16 and the equipment 
capacity for each unit process to determine the electricity cost in US$2020 per 
ton SCP. The electricity needed for heat removal from the growth reactor was 
calculated using the heat production rate for methanotrophs (see equation (3))13 
divided by the COP (heat energy removed per electricity input):
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
53
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
Heat production rate = ΔcHmet × 1
Y × μ × ρ × V
(3)
where ΔcHmet is metabolic heat production (kJ per g CH4), Y is cell yield  
(g SCP per g CH4), μ is growth rate (per day), ρ is cell density (g SCP per l)  
and V is reactor size (l).
For the price of electricity, we used US$0.10 kWh−1, representative of US 
commercial prices53. This is a conservative assumption, as landfills and wastewater 
treatment plants may have access to industrial prices for electricity (averaging 
around US$0.07 kWh−1 in the United States53). However, some facilities may not be 
able to reach the same scale as large industrial customers and thus may pay closer 
to commercial rates. Note that remote oil and gas facilities may not have an electric 
grid connection, potentially increasing electricity costs at these locations.
Methane cleanup. We assumed that all stranded methane in this analysis requires 
cleaning to remove contaminants before use as a methanotroph feedstock. As 
methanotrophs metabolize and assimilate CO2 into their biomass54, cleanup costs 
will be lower than those required for injected biomethane into the natural gas 
grid55. Because of the different levels of treatment required to clean and upgrade 
biogas, landfill gas and natural gas, we calculated the cost of methane cleanup 
separately from the equipment costs associated with methanotrophic biomass 
production (bioreactor, gas compression systems and post-processing). We 
surveyed the literature to calculate the cost of methane cleanup per ton CH4 and 
considered systems designed for desulfurization and siloxane removal56–58, and 
we included the annualized capital cost, variable costs and/or electricity costs 
(additional details are provided in the Supplementary Methods). Depending on 
the extent of contaminant removal, cleanup costs reported in the literature ranged 
from US$5 per ton CH4 to US$128 per ton CH4. We used a mid-value of US$50 per 
ton CH4 as our baseline value, representative of the cost of upgrading a wastewater 
treatment facility to include an adsorption unit for biogas cleanup57. For the grid 
baseline scenario, we removed the cost of methane cleanup.
Macronutrient costs. Microorganisms require substrates that serve as sources of 
macro- and micronutrients necessary for growth. Macronutrient requirements are 
provided in equation (1). For methanotrophs, methane is the source of energy and 
carbon. For facilities located at wastewater treatment plants, landfills, and oil and 
gas facilities, we assumed that methane is readily available at no additional capital 
cost aside from cleanup. While reasonable for flared methane, we recognize that 
this is a generous assumption for methane currently directly emitted. For the grid 
scenario, we used the US Energy Information Administration industrial price for 
US natural gas averaged over the past ten years (US$234 per ton CH4)59.
We used urea and diammonium phosphate as sources of nitrogen and 
phosphorus. We calculated baseline substrate costs using yield values (mol 
SCP per mol substrate) and assumed a phosphorus content in biomass of 2% 
(Supplementary Table 8)47. For baseline prices, we used the ten-year average from 
2010 to 2020 reported by the World Bank Commodity Price Index, converted 
to US$2020 for urea (CH4N2O) and diammonium phosphate ((NH4)2HPO4)35. 
This resulted in baseline costs of US$550 per ton NH3 and US$1,790 per 
ton phosphorus, or US$83 per ton SCP for NH3 and US$36 per ton SCP for 
phosphorus, using the yield assumptions in Supplementary Table 8. For oxygen 
supply, we used the delivery of compressed air to the bioreactor. The cost of oxygen 
is thus accounted for in the capital cost of the air compressor and the associated 
electricity cost (described above), rather than a direct input to our substrate cost 
calculation. In the Supplementary Methods, we compare compressed air delivery 
with the cost of an air separation unit and purchasing commercial O2.
Labour costs. To determine the labour demand in worker-hours per ton SCP 
for a given plant size, we used values reported in the literature for bioplastic 
production of polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) using methanotrophs. Specific strains 
of methanotrophic bacteria can accumulate PHB when subjected to imbalanced 
growth conditions in a process that is similar to methanotrophic SCP production, 
albeit with additional processing steps60 (Supplementary Note 3 discusses 
the differences between PHB and SCP cultivation). Criddle et al.31 report the 
number of personnel needed for the three stages of production (fermentation, 
extraction and packaging) for plant capacities ranging from 500 tons PHB per 
year to 100,000 tons PHB per year. We used the number of personnel required 
for fermentation and packaging (PHB biopolymer extraction is not necessary for 
SCP production) and the total reported hours of operation per year to determine 
worker-hours needed per ton of PHB produced in a given plant size. We directly 
used these values as the worker-hours needed to produce an equivalent mass 
of methanotrophic biomass. This is a conservative assumption, as fermentation 
bioreactors that can support a fixed rate of PHB production can probably produce 
twice as much methanotrophic biomass: PHB can make up 50% of cell biomass 
when methanotrophs are subjected to the required multi-stage fermentation 
process described by Criddle et al.31. The labour calculations are discussed more 
fully in the Supplementary Methods.
Water and land requirements. We determined a water requirement of 33.3 tons 
H2O per ton SCP using the cell density of 30 g l−1. For our system, we assumed 
that 90% of the water requirement is met by capturing water from dewatering 
centrifuges and recycling it to the main growth reactor(s)16. The remaining water 
requirement is met through purchasing water at US$1 m−3, a relatively high value. 
This could be representative of the cost of desalinated water61 or building a pipeline 
to transport water to a remote location. Due to the comparatively low cost of water 
in our results, we combined this cost with that of the macronutrients nitrogen and 
phosphorus, referring to the cost of all three as ‘nutrient media’.
In our analysis, we did not add additional costs for the purchase of land. For 
the scenarios under consideration, the methanotrophic SCP production equipment 
is being added to an existing facility, which we assume has sufficient vacant space.
Utilization factor. We applied a utilization factor of 80% to our baseline scenario 
to account for plant downtime for maintenance and repair. This means that the 
facility produces 80% as much SCP as it could over the whole year if it operated 
at full capacity all the time. The average utilization of oil refinery capacity over 
the past ten years is 90% (ref. 62). To account for the potentially variable quantity 
and quality of gas production across our different scenarios, we chose 80%. 
When methane is sourced from wastewater treatment or the natural gas grid, we 
anticipate this value to be conservative.
We applied the utilization factor to all inputs that vary with the final SCP 
production rate: annualized capital cost, annualized operations and maintenance, 
worker hours needed and total annualized methane cleanup. While total 
annualized methane cleanup includes variable costs that are fixed per ton of CH4 
treated, we assumed that costs are dominated by capital.
Total levelized cost. We calculated the total levelized cost of producing 
methanotrophic protein including all techno-economic parameters described 
above using equation (4) (for additional details on the full formulation, see 
Supplementary Methods):
Total levelized cost = annualized capital cost + annualized O&M
+electricity cost + substrate cost + labour cost
(4)
We calculated facility size (tons CH4 per day) for each methane source 
scenario (wastewater treatment, landfills, oil and gas, and grid) using the largest 
point sources in our database, with the grid case at the same scale as the landfill 
case. We compared the methanotroph production cost with the price of fishmeal, 
represented by the average price over the past ten years, US$1,612 per ton (the 
ten-year low and high are US$1,351 per ton and US$1,944 per ton)35.
Supply curve. To make the supply curve depicted in Fig. 4, we generated a master 
dataset with the total annualized cost of methanotroph production, under the 
baseline assumptions, for each methane source included in Fig. 2. We sorted 
the methane sources in order of increasing production cost and calculated the 
cumulative SCP production rate (tons per day) as higher-cost locations were 
incrementally added to the total production. We used the ten-year average price 
of fishmeal (US$1,600) for comparison, although see Supplementary Fig. 2 for 
historical fishmeal prices from the past four decades35. The fishmeal production 
rate of 15,900 tons per day is from 20182.
Sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis individually varied each input 
parameter from its baseline to low and high values, representing the feasible range 
of current values reflected in the existing literature, and calculated the resulting 
total annualized cost of methanotrophic biomass.
We surveyed the literature to determine low and high unit capital costs for 
methanotrophic biomass production, included in Supplementary Table 14. We 
considered techno-economic analyses where methanotrophic biomass itself 
was the final product as well as those where methanotrophs were being used for 
polyhydroxyalkanoate production. In the latter scenario, capital costs were adjusted 
to include only the processes necessary for methanotrophic biomass production 
(Supplementary Methods). For the weighted average cost of capital, used in 
converting capital cost into levelized cost, we used a low value of 8% and a high 
value of 12%, representing modest variation in potential investor confidence in this 
emerging technology52. We varied the COP from a baseline of 3 (ref. 16) to a low 
value of 2 and a high value of 6. The low and high endpoints for microbial yield 
were based on experimentally reported values in the scientific literature63.
For ammonia and phosphorus, we maintained the baseline described above, 
using the average ten-year price. We used the lowest and highest annual average 
prices during this period as the low and high values. For the cost of electricity, 
we used a low value of US$0.06 kWh−1, which is a low-end price for industrial 
consumers in the United States53. For the high value, we used US$0.14 kWh−1, 
just above the average residential prices in the United States53 (one-year average 
industrial, residential and commercial electricity costs are reported in the 
Supplementary Methods).
Our baseline value for the labour requirement (one worker-hour per ton) 
is based on literature for PHB production. For the low value, we reduced this 
requirement by 50%. This was chosen to reflect the fact that an SCP production 
facility should be able to produce twice as much final product as a PHB facility, 
because PHB will reach only 50% of the total cell dry mass (that is, bioreactors 
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
54
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
producing 500 tons of PHB per year can produce 1,000 tons of SCP per year)31. For 
the high value input, we calculated the plant size needed to completely meet the 
market demand for fishmeal on the basis of the supply curve in Fig. 4, applying 
the labour cost scaling relationship described in the Supplementary Methods 
to determine the associated labour requirement. This high input value of six 
worker-hours per ton SCP corresponds to a source size of 24 tons CH4 per day 
and produces methanotrophic biomass at US$1,972 per ton under the baseline 
assumptions at a landfill or oil and gas facility.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The data used in the analysis and figures are publicly available. The data on 
flaring from oil and gas facilities are available through the Earth Observation 
Group (https://eogdata.mines.edu/download_global_flare.html). All data on 
methane emissions from oil and gas facilities and landfills, flaring from landfills, 
and unit processes at wastewater treatment plants are available from the US EPA 
through the following programmes: Facilities Level Information on GreenHouse 
gases Tool (https://ghgdata.epa.gov/ghgp/main.do), Landfill Methane Outreach 
Program (https://www.epa.gov/lmop/lmop-landfill-and-project-database) 
and Clean Watersheds Needs Survey for 2004 (https://www.epa.gov/
cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-2004-report-and-data), 
2008 (https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-
2008-report-and-data) and 2012 (https://www.epa.gov/cwns/
clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-2012-report-and-data).
Code availability
Code supporting the current study is available at https://github.com/
sahar-elabbadi/methane-to-protein.
Received: 23 April 2021; Accepted: 28 September 2021;  
Published online: 22 November 2021
References
	1.	 Mbow, C. et al. in Special Report on Climate Change and Land (eds Shukla, P. 
R. et al.) 437–550 (IPCC, 2019).
	2.	 GLOBEFISH Highlights January 2020 Issue, with Jan.–Sep. 2019 Statistics 
(FAO, 2020).
	3.	 Edwards, P., Zhang, W., Belton, B. & Little, D. C. Misunderstandings, myths 
and mantras in aquaculture: its contribution to world food supplies has been 
systematically over reported. Mar. Policy 106, 103547 (2019).
	4.	 Willett, W. et al. Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT-Lancet commission on 
healthy diets from sustainable food systems. Lancet 393, 447–492 (2019).
	5.	 Shah, M. R. et al. Microalgae in aquafeeds for a sustainable aquaculture 
industry. J. Appl. Phycol. 30, 197–213 (2018).
	6.	 Naylor, R. L. et al. A 20-year retrospective review of global aquaculture. 
Nature 591, 551–563 (2021).
	7.	 Ortuño Crespo, G. & Dunn, D. C. A review of the impacts of fisheries on 
open-ocean ecosystems. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 74, 2283–2297 (2017).
	8.	 Malcorps, W. et al. The sustainability conundrum of fishmeal substitution by 
plant ingredients in shrimp feeds. Sustainability 11, 1212 (2019).
	9.	 Boucher, O., Friedlingstein, P., Collins, B. & Shine, K. P. The indirect global 
warming potential and global temperature change potential due to methane 
oxidation. Environ. Res. Lett. 4, 044007 (2009).
	10.	Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–2018 Technical 
Report No. 430-R-20-002 (US Environmental Protection Agency, 2020).
	11.	Clomburg, J. M., Crumbley, A. M. & Gonzalez, R. Industrial biomanufacturing: 
the future of chemical production. Science 355, eaag0804 (2017).
	12.	Øverland, M., Tauson, A.-H., Shearer, K. & Skrede, A. Evaluation of 
methane-utilising bacteria products as feed ingredients for monogastric 
animals. Arch. Anim. Nutr. 64, 171–189 (2010).
	13.	El Abbadi, S. H. & Criddle, C. S. Engineering the dark food chain. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 53, 2273–2287 (2019).
	14.	Our products. Calysta http://www.feedkind.com/products/ (2021).
	15.	Protein. Unibio https://www.unibio.dk/end-product/protein/ (2021).
	16.	Levett, I. et al. Techno-economic assessment of poly-3-hydroxybutyrate 
(PHB) production from methane—the case for thermophilic bioprocessing. J. 
Environ. Chem. Eng. 4, 3724–3733 (2016).
	17.	Pikaar, I. et al. Decoupling livestock from land use through industrial feed 
production pathways. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52, 7351–7359 (2018).
	18.	Matassa, S. et al. Upcycling of biowaste carbon and nutrients in line with 
consumer confidence: the ‘full gas’ route to single cell protein. Green Chem. 
22, 4912–4929 (2020).
	19.	Verbeeck, K., De Vrieze, J., Pikaar, I., Verstraete, W. & Rabaey, K. Assessing 
the potential for up-cycling recovered resources from anaerobic digestion 
through microbial protein production. Microb. Biotechnol. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1751-7915.13600 (2020).
	20.	Landfill Gas Energy Project Data and Landfill Technical Data (Environmental 
Protection Agency, 2020).
	21.	Facilities Level Information on GreenHouse Gases Tool (Environmental 
Protection Agency, 2019).
	22.	Global Gas Flaring Observed from Space (Earth Observation Group, 2019).
	23.	Clean Watersheds Needs Survey (CWNS) 2004 Report and Data 
(Environmental Protection Agency, 2004).
	24.	Clean Watersheds Needs Survey (CWNS) 2008 Report and Data 
(Environmental Protection Agency, 2008).
	25.	Clean Watersheds Needs Survey (CWNS) 2012 Report and Data 
(Environmental Protection Agency, 2012).
	26.	Yanwen, S., Linville, J. L., Meltem, U.-D., Mintz, M. M. & Snyder, S. W. An 
overview of biogas production and utilization at full-scale wastewater 
treatment plants (WWTPs) in the United States: challenges and opportunities 
towards energy-neutral WWTPs. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 50,  
346–362 (2015).
	27.	Cho, J. H. & Kim, I. H. Fish meal—nutritive value. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. 
Nutr. 95, 685–692 (2011).
	28.	Humbird, D., Davis, R. & McMillan, J. D. Aeration costs in stirred-tank and 
bubble column bioreactors. Biochem. Eng. J. 127, 161–166 (2017).
	29.	Electric Power Monthly (US Energy Information Administration, 2021).
	30.	Petersen, L. A. H., John, V., Jørgensen, S. B. & Gernaey, K. V. Mixing and 
mass transfer in a pilot scale U-loop bioreactor. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 114, 
344–354 (2017).
	31.	Criddle, C. S., Billington, S. L. & Frank, C. W. Renewable Bioplastics and 
Biocomposites from Biogas Methane and Waste-Derived Feedstock: 
Development of Enabling Technology, Life Cycle Assessment, and Analysis of 
Costs Technical Report No. DRRR-2014-1502 (California Department of 
Resources Recycling and Recovery, 2014).
	32.	Cusworth, D. H. et al. Using remote sensing to detect, validate, and quantify 
methane emissions from California solid waste operations. Environ. Res. Lett. 
15, 054012 (2020).
	33.	Siegert, M. et al. Comparison of nonprecious metal cathode materials for 
methane production by electromethanogenesis. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2, 
910–917 (2014).
	34.	Kim, A. H. et al. More than a fertilizer: wastewater-derived struvite as a high 
value, sustainable fire retardant. Green Chem. 23, 4510–4523 (2021).
	35.	Commodity Prices—Annual Prices Technical Report (World Bank, 2021).
	36.	Jannathulla, R. et al. Fishmeal availability in the scenarios of climate change: 
inevitability of fishmeal replacement in aquafeeds and approaches for the 
utilization of plant protein sources. Aquac. Res. 50, 3493–3506 (2019).
	37.	Nathan, P., Klinger, D. H., Sims, N. A., Janice-Renee, Y. & Kittinger, J. N. 
Nutritional attributes, substitutability, scalability, and environmental intensity 
of an illustrative subset of current and future protein sources for aquaculture 
feeds: joint consideration of potential synergies and trade-offs. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 52, 5532–5544 (2018).
	38.	Cumberlege, T., Blenkinsopp, T. & Clark, J. Assessment of Environmental 
Footprint of FeedKind Protein Technical Report (Carbon Trust, 2016).
	39.	Veiga, P., Mendes, M., Martin, D. & Lee-Harwood, B. Reduction Fisheries: SFP 
Fisheries Sustainability Overview 2019 Technical Report (Sustainable Fisheries 
Partnership, 2019).
	40.	Zhang, W. et al. Fishing for feed in China: facts, impacts and implications. 
Fish Fish. 21, 47–62 (2020).
	41.	Kok, B. et al. Fish as feed: using economic allocation to quantify the  
Fish In : Fish Out ratio of major fed aquaculture species. Aquaculture 528, 
735474 (2020).
	42.	Klinger, D. & Naylor, R. Searching for solutions in aquaculture: charting a 
sustainable course. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 37, 247–276 (2012).
	43.	van der Ha, D., Bundervoet, B., Verstraete, W. & Boon, N. A sustainable, 
carbon neutral methane oxidation by a partnership of methane oxidizing 
communities and microalgae. Water Res. 45, 2845–2854 (2011).
	44.	Rasouli, Z., Valverde-Pérez, B., D’Este, M., De Francisci, D. & Angelidaki, I. 
Nutrient recovery from industrial wastewater as single cell protein by a 
co-culture of green microalgae and methanotrophs. Biochem. Eng. J. 134, 
129–135 (2018).
	45.	Gingerich, D. B. & Mauter, M. S. Air emission reduction benefits of biogas 
electricity generation at municipal wastewater treatment plants. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 52, 1633–1643 (2018).
	46.	Parker, N., Williams, R., Dominguez-Faus, R. & Scheitrum, D. Renewable 
natural gas in California: an assessment of the technical and economic 
potential. Energy Policy 111, 235–245 (2017).
	47.	Rittmann, B. E. & McCarty, P. L. Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and 
Applications 2nd edn (McGraw-Hill Education, 2020).
	48.	Vo, T. T. Q., Wall, D. M., Ring, D., Rajendran, K. & Murphy, J. D. 
Techno-economic analysis of biogas upgrading via amine scrubber, carbon 
capture and ex-situ methanation. Appl. Energy 212, 1191–1202 (2018).
	49.	Wendlandt, K.-D., Jechorek, M., Helm, J. & Stottmeister, U. Producing 
poly-3-hydroxybutyrate with a high molecular mass from methane. J. 
Biotechnol. 86, 127–133 (2001).
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
55
Articles
NATUre SUsTAInAbIlITy
	50.	Garrett, D. E. Chemical Engineering Economics (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1989).
	51.	CPI for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) Technical Report (US Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, 2020).
	52.	Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC): Explanation and Examples 
Technical Report (New Constructs, 2016).
	53.	Retail Sales of Electricity to Ultimate Customers (Annual) Technical Report 
(US Energy Information Administration, 2020).
	54.	Yang, S. et al. Global molecular analyses of methane metabolism in 
methanotrophic Alphaproteobacterium, Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b. 
Part II. Metabolomics and 13C-labeling study. Front. Microbiol. 4, 70 (2013).
	55.	Czyrnek-Delêtre, M. M., Ahern, E. P. & Murphy, J. D. Is small-scale 
upgrading of landfill gas to biomethane for use as a cellulosic transport 
biofuel economically viable? Biofuels Bioprod. Biorefin. 10, 139–149 (2016).
	56.	Tansel, B. & Surita, S. C. Managing siloxanes in biogas-to-energy facilities: 
economic comparison of pre- vs post-combustion practices. Waste Manage. 
96, 121–127 (2019).
	57.	Aguilera, P. G. & Gutiérrez Ortiz, F. J. Techno-economic assessment of biogas 
plant upgrading by adsorption of hydrogen sulfide on treated sewage-sludge. 
Energy Convers. Manage. 126, 411–420 (2016).
	58.	Pipatmanomai, S., Kaewluan, S. & Vitidsant, T. Economic assessment of 
biogas-to-electricity generation system with H2S removal by activated carbon 
in small pig farm. Appl. Energy 86, 669–674 (2009).
	59.	United States Natural Gas Industrial Price (Dollars per Thousand Cubic Feet) 
(US Energy Information Administration, 2020).
	60.	Pieja, A. J., Rostkowski, K. H. & Criddle, C. S. Distribution and selection of 
poly-3-hydroxybutyrate production capacity in methanotrophic 
proteobacteria. Microb. Ecol. 62, 564–573 (2011).
	61.	Noreddine, G., Missimer, T. M. & Amy, G. L. Technical review and evaluation 
of the economics of water desalination: current and future challenges for 
better water supply sustainability. Desalination 309, 197–207 (2013).
	62.	U.S. Refinery Utilization and Capacity (US Energy Information 
Administration, 2019).
	63.	Jorge Luis, M., Dubrawski, K. L., El Abbadi, S. H., Choo, K.-H. & Criddle, C. 
S. Membrane and fluid contactors for safe and efficient methane delivery in 
methanotrophic bioreactors. J. Environ. Eng. 146, 03120006 (2020).
	64.	Jinghua, X. & VanBriesen, J. M. Expanded thermodynamic true yield 
prediction model: adjustments and limitations. Biodegradation 19,  
99–127 (2008).
Acknowledgements
This study was funded by the Stanford Center for Innovation in Global Health (S.H.E., 
C.S.C. and S.P.L.) and the Stanford Natural Gas Initiative (S.H.E., E.D.S., C.S.C. and 
A.R.B.), an industry consortium that supports independent research at Stanford 
University. We thank R. Hickey for input on industrial bioreactor scaling.
Author contributions
S.H.E. and E.D.S. conceptualized the project. S.H.E. and E.D.S. devised the methodology 
with feedback from A.R.B., C.S.C. and S.P.L. S.H.E. and E.D.S. validated the 
methodology, conducted the investigation and wrote the original draft of the paper. 
S.H.E., E.D.S., A.R.B., S.P.L. and C.S.C. reviewed and edited the paper. E.D.S., A.R.B. and 
C.S.C. supervised the project. S.H.E. and E.D.S. conducted the project administration. 
S.H.E., E.D.S., A.R.B., S.P.L. and C.S.C. acquired the funding.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material 
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00796-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Craig S. Criddle.
Peer review information Nature Sustainability thanks Richard Cottrell, Richard Newton 
and Jo De Vrieze for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2021
Nature Sustainability | VOL 5 | January 2022 | 47–56 | www.nature.com/natsustain
56
1
nature portfolio  |  reporting summary
March 2021
Corresponding author(s):
Craig S. Criddle
Last updated by author(s): Sep 15, 2021
Reporting Summary
Nature Portfolio wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Portfolio policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
No software used
Data analysis
Analytica 5.3.3.156, 1 Nov 2019 
RStudio Version 1.2.5033 
Microsoft Excel Version 2013 (Build 13901.20462 Click-to-Run)
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and 
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Portfolio guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability 
- For clinical datasets or third party data, please ensure that the statement adheres to our policy 
 
Data used in analysis and figures are publicly available. Data on flaring from oil and gas facilities are available through the Earth Observation Group (https://
eogdata.mines.edu/download_global_flare.html). All data on methane emissions from oil and gas facilities and landfills, flaring from landfills, and unit processes at 
wastewater treatment plants are available from the US Environmental Protection Agency through the following programs: Facilities Level Information on 
Greenhouse Gases Tool (https://ghgdata.epa.gov/ghgp/main.do}{https://ghgdata.epa.gov/ghgp/main.do ), Landfill Methane Outreach Program (https://
www.epa.gov/lmop/lmop-landfill-and-project-databas), and Clean Watersheds Needs Survey for 2004 (https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-
2
nature portfolio  |  reporting summary
March 2021
cwns-2004-report-and-data), 2008 (https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-2008-report-and-data), and 2012 (https://www.epa.gov/
cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-2012-report-and-data). 
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences
Behavioural & social sciences
 Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description
We conducted a quantitative analysis of stranded methane sources in the United States from landfills, oil and gas facilities and 
wastewater treatment plants. Our techno-economic model evaluates the cost of producing methanotrophic protein from point 
sources of methane, and compares price and production volume with that of the global fishmeal market. 
Research sample
We use existing publicly datasets for our analysis of methane emissions and flaring in the United States. Data on flaring from oil and 
gas facilities are available through the Earth Observation Group at the Colorado School of Mines (https://eogdata.mines.edu/
download_global_flare.html). All data on methane emissions from oil and gas facilities and landfills, flaring from landfills, and unit 
processes at wastewater treatment plants are available from the US Environmental Protection Agency through the following 
programs: Facilities Level Information on Greenhouse Gases Tool (https://ghgdata.epa.gov/ghgp/main.do), Landfill Methane 
Outreach Program (https://www.epa.gov/lmop/lmop-landfill-and-project-database), and Clean Watersheds Needs Survey for 2004 
(https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-2004-report-and-data), 2008 (https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-
watersheds-needs-survey-cwns-2008-report-and-data), and 2012 (https://www.epa.gov/cwns/clean-watersheds-needs-survey-
cwns-2012-report-and-data).
Sampling strategy
We use all reported data in our datasets, and did not sub-sample. 
Data collection
Not applicable
Timing
Not applicable, we did not generate new datasets but used publicly available datasets. 
Data exclusions
Not applicable, we did not generate new datasets but used publicly available datasets. 
Non-participation
Not applicable 
Randomization
Not applicable 
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response. 
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging
